An act relating to affordable housing; amending ss.
125.01055 and 166.04151, F.S.; requiring counties and
municipalities, respectively, to authorize multifamily
and mixed-use residential uses as allowable uses for
specified property; providing requirements for certain
proposed developments; specifying that certain
proposed developments shall not exclude an assemblage
of certain parcels; providing for the expiration of
certain provisions; prohibiting counties and
municipalities, respectively, from restricting the
height of certain proposed developments through other
dimensional means and from requiring certain setbacks
or stepbacks; revising the definitions of the terms
"commercial use" and "industrial use"; revising
applicability; providing retroactive applicability;
authorizing applicants for certain proposed
developments to notify the county or municipality, as
applicable, by a specified date of intent to proceed
under certain provisions; requiring counties and
municipalities to allow certain applicants to submit
revised applications, written requests, and notices of
intent to account for changes made by the act;
amending s. 196.1978, F.S.; creating a definition for
"multifamily project"; revising a specified finding
that a taxing authority must make in order to elect
not to exempt certain property from certain ad valorem
taxation; authorizing certain property owners in a
multifamily project to apply for and continue to
receive an exemption; amending s. 333.03, F.S.;
providing an exception to the inapplicability of
certain provisions; amending s. 760.22, F.S.; revising
the definition of the term "person"; amending s.
760.26, F.S.; revising a prohibition on discriminatory
practices in land use decisions and in permitting of
development to include housing that is affordable;
amending s. 760.35, F.S.; waiving the state's
sovereign immunity for certain causes of action based
upon housing discrimination; providing applicability;
amending s. 420.615, F.S.; authorizing a local
government to provide a density bonus incentive to
landowners who make certain real property donations to
assist in the provision of affordable housing for
military families; requiring the Office of Program
Policy Analysis and Government Accountability to
evaluate the efficacy of using mezzanine finance and
the potential of tiny homes for specified purposes;
requiring the office to consult with certain entities;
requiring the office to submit a certain report to the
Legislature by a specified date; providing an
effective date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:
Section 1. Paragraphs (a), (d), (n), and (o) of subsection
(7) of section 125.01055, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
125.01055 Affordable housing.—
(7)(a)1. A county must authorize multifamily and mixed-use
residential as allowable uses in any area zoned for commercial,
industrial, or mixed use[added: ;][deleted: , and] in portions of any flexibly zoned
area such as a planned unit development permitted for
commercial, industrial, or mixed use; [added: on property owned by a county, municipality, or school district; and on property that is more than 3 acres in size and owned by a religious institution, as defined in s. 170.201(2), which has contained a house of public worship for at least 10 years before the proposed development, regardless of the underlying zoning,] if at
least 40 percent of the residential units in a proposed
multifamily development are rental units that, for a period of
at least 30 years, are affordable as defined in s. 420.0004.
Notwithstanding any other law, local ordinance, or regulation to
the contrary, a county may not require a proposed multifamily
development to obtain a zoning or land use change, special
exception, conditional use approval, variance, transfer of
density or development units, amendment to a development of
regional impact, or comprehensive plan amendment for the
building height, zoning, and densities authorized under this
subsection. For mixed-use residential projects, at least 65
percent of the total square footage must be used for residential
purposes. The county may not require that more than 10 percent
of the total square footage of such mixed-use residential
projects be used for nonresidential purposes. [added: A proposed development on property owned by a county, municipality, or school district must be within the geographic boundaries of the respective county, municipality, or school district, and the respective county, municipality, or school district must be a party to the application for the proposed development. A proposed development on property owned by a religious institution must be applied for by both the applicant and the religious institution, and the house of public worship must continue to operate on the property after the proposed development is constructed.]
[added: 2. A multifamily or mixed-use residential development proposed under this section shall not exclude an assemblage of parcels under common ownership or control separated by no more than 15 feet of land and limited to public pedestrian access. This subparagraph expires July 1, 2030.]
(d)1. A county may not restrict the height of a proposed
development authorized under this subsection below the highest
currently allowed, or allowed on July 1, 2023, height for a
commercial or residential building located in its jurisdiction
within 1 mile of the proposed development or three stories,
whichever is higher. [added: A county may not restrict height below the height authorized under this paragraph through other dimensional means, such as establishing setbacks or stepbacks by height, or require setbacks or stepbacks that are more restrictive than the minimum permitted in the proposed development.] For purposes of
this paragraph, the term "highest currently allowed height" does
not include the height of any building that met the requirements
of this subsection or the height of any building that has
received any bonus, variance, or other special exception for
height provided in the county's land development regulations as
an incentive for development.
2. If the proposed development is adjacent to, on two or
more sides, a parcel zoned for single-family residential use
which is within a single-family residential development with at
least 25 contiguous single-family homes, the county may restrict
the height of the proposed development to 150 percent of the
tallest building on any property adjacent to the proposed
development, the highest currently allowed, or allowed on July
1, 2023, height for the property provided in the county's land
development regulations, or three stories, whichever is higher,
not to exceed 10 stories. For the purposes of this paragraph,
the term "adjacent to" means those properties sharing more than
one point of a property line, but does not include properties
separated by a public road.
3. If the proposed development is on a parcel with a
contributing structure or building within a historic district
which was listed in the National Register of Historic Places
before January 1, 2000, or is on a parcel with a structure or
building individually listed in the National Register of
Historic Places, the county may restrict the height of the
proposed development to the highest currently allowed, or
allowed on July 1, 2023, height for a commercial or residential
building located in its jurisdiction within three-fourths of a
mile of the proposed development or three stories, whichever is
higher. The term "highest currently allowed" in this paragraph
includes the maximum height allowed for any building in a zoning
district irrespective of any conditions.
(n) As used in this subsection, the term:
1. "Commercial use" means activities associated with the
sale, rental, or distribution of products or the performance of
services related thereto. The term includes, but is not limited
to, such uses or activities as retail sales; wholesale sales;
rentals of equipment, goods, or products; offices; restaurants;
public lodging establishments as described in s. 509.242(1)(a);
food service vendors; sports arenas; theaters; tourist
attractions; and other for-profit business activities. A parcel
zoned to permit such uses by right without the requirement to
obtain a variance or waiver is considered commercial use for the
purposes of this section, irrespective of the local land
development regulation's listed category or title. The term does
not include home-based businesses or cottage food operations
undertaken on residential property, public lodging
establishments as described in s. 509.242(1)(c), or uses that
are accessory, ancillary, incidental to the allowable uses, or
allowed only on a temporary basis. Recreational uses, such as
golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools, and clubhouses,
within an area designated for residential use are not commercial
use, irrespective of how they are operated. [added: Farms and farm operations as those terms are defined in s. 823.14(3) and uses associated therewith, including the packaging and sale of products raised on the premises, are not commercial use.]
2. "Industrial use" means activities associated with the
manufacture, assembly, processing, or storage of products or the
performance of services related thereto. The term includes, but
is not limited to, such uses or activities as automobile
manufacturing or repair, boat manufacturing or repair, junk
yards, [deleted: meat packing facilities, citrus processing and packing facilities, produce processing and packing facilities,]
electrical generating plants, water treatment plants, sewage
treatment plants, and solid waste disposal sites. A parcel zoned
to permit such uses by right without the requirement to obtain a
variance or waiver is considered industrial use for the purposes
of this section, irrespective of the local land development
regulation's listed category or title. The term does not include
uses that are accessory, ancillary, incidental to the allowable
uses, or allowed only on a temporary basis. Recreational uses,
such as golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools, and
clubhouses, within an area designated for residential use are
not industrial use, irrespective of how they are operated. [added: Farms and farm operations as those terms are defined in s. 823.14(3) and uses associated therewith, including the packaging and sale of products raised on the premises, are not industrial use.]
3. "Mixed use" means any use that combines multiple types
of approved land uses from at least two of the residential use,
commercial use, and industrial use categories. The term does not
include uses that are accessory, ancillary, incidental to the
allowable uses, or allowed only on a temporary basis.
Recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, swimming
pools, and clubhouses, within an area designated for residential
use are not mixed use, irrespective of how they are operated.
4. "Planned unit development" has the same meaning as
provided in s. 163.3202(5)(b).
(o) This subsection does not apply to:
1. Airport-impacted areas as provided in s. 333.03.
2. Property defined as recreational and commercial working
waterfront in s. 342.201(2)(b) in any area zoned as industrial.
3. The Wekiva Study Area, as described in s. 369.316.
4. The Everglades Protection Area, as defined in s.
373.4592(2).
[added: 5. Areas subject to land development regulations, as defined in s. 163.3164, which are in existence before July 1, 2026, and are intended to retain the open character of land, including, but not limited to, open space districts, open space recreation districts, open use estate districts, open use rural districts, and park and open space districts.]
[added: 6. Any area of critical state concern, as designated in ss. 380.055, 380.0551, 380.0552, 380.0553, and 380.0555.]
[added: 7. Any portion of a property encumbered by a recorded conservation easement, as defined in s. 704.06(1).]
Section 2. Paragraphs (a), (d), (n), and (o) of subsection
(7) of section 166.04151, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
166.04151 Affordable housing.—
(7)(a)1. A municipality must authorize multifamily and
mixed-use residential as allowable uses in any area zoned for
commercial, industrial, or mixed use[added: ;][deleted: , and] in portions of any
flexibly zoned area such as a planned unit development permitted
for commercial, industrial, or mixed use; [added: on property owned by a county, municipality, or school district; and on property that is more than 3 acres in size and owned by a religious institution, as defined in s. 170.201(2), which has contained a house of public worship for at least 10 years before the proposed development, regardless of the underlying zoning,] if at
least 40 percent of the residential units in a proposed
multifamily development are rental units that, for a period of
at least 30 years, are affordable as defined in s. 420.0004.
Notwithstanding any other law, local ordinance, or regulation to
the contrary, a municipality may not require a proposed
multifamily development to obtain a zoning or land use change,
special exception, conditional use approval, variance, transfer
of density or development units, amendment to a development of
regional impact, amendment to a municipal charter, or
comprehensive plan amendment for the building height, zoning,
and densities authorized under this subsection. For mixed-use
residential projects, at least 65 percent of the total square
footage must be used for residential purposes. The municipality
may not require that more than 10 percent of the total square
footage of such mixed-use residential projects be used for
nonresidential purposes. [added: A proposed development on property owned by a county, municipality, or school district must be within the geographic boundaries of the respective county, municipality, or school district, and the respective county, municipality, or school district must be a party to the application for the proposed development. A proposed development on property owned by a religious institution must be applied for by both the applicant and the religious institution, and the house of public worship must continue to operate on the property after the proposed development is constructed.]
[added: 2. A multifamily or mixed-use residential development proposed under this section shall not exclude an assemblage of parcels under common ownership or control separated by no more than 15 feet of land and limited to public pedestrian access. This subparagraph expires July 1, 2030.]
(d)1. A municipality may not restrict the height of a
proposed development authorized under this subsection below the
highest currently allowed, or allowed on July 1, 2023, height
for a commercial or residential building located in its
jurisdiction within 1 mile of the proposed development or three
stories, whichever is higher. [added: A municipality may not restrict height below the height authorized under this paragraph through other dimensional means, such as establishing setbacks or stepbacks by height, or require setbacks or stepbacks that are more restrictive than the minimum permitted in the proposed development.] For purposes of this paragraph, the term "highest
currently allowed height" does not include the height of any
building that met the requirements of this subsection or the
height of any building that has received any bonus, variance, or
other special exception for height provided in the
municipality's land development regulations as an incentive for
development.
2. If the proposed development is adjacent to, on two or
more sides, a parcel zoned for single-family residential use
that is within a single-family residential development with at
least 25 contiguous single-family homes, the municipality may
restrict the height of the proposed development to 150 percent
of the tallest building on any property adjacent to the proposed
development, the highest currently allowed, or allowed on July
1, 2023, height for the property provided in the municipality's
land development regulations, or three stories, whichever is
higher, not to exceed 10 stories. For the purposes of this
paragraph, the term "adjacent to" means those properties sharing
more than one point of a property line, but does not include
properties separated by a public road or body of water,
including manmade lakes or ponds. For a proposed development
located within a municipality within an area of critical state
concern as designated by s. 380.0552 or chapter 28-36, Florida
Administrative Code, the term "story" includes only the
habitable space above the base flood elevation as designated by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the most current
Flood Insurance Rate Map. A story may not exceed 10 feet in
height measured from finished floor to finished floor, including
space for mechanical equipment. The highest story may not exceed
10 feet from finished floor to the top plate.
3. If the proposed development is on a parcel with a
contributing structure or building within a historic district
which was listed in the National Register of Historic Places
before January 1, 2000, or is on a parcel with a structure or
building individually listed in the National Register of
Historic Places, the municipality may restrict the height of the
proposed development to the highest currently allowed, or
allowed on July 1, 2023, height for a commercial or residential
building located in its jurisdiction within three-fourths of a
mile of the proposed development or three stories, whichever is
higher. The term "highest currently allowed" in this paragraph
includes the maximum height allowed for any building in a zoning
district irrespective of any conditions.
(n) As used in this subsection, the term:
1. "Commercial use" means activities associated with the
sale, rental, or distribution of products or the performance of
services related thereto. The term includes, but is not limited
to, such uses or activities as retail sales; wholesale sales;
rentals of equipment, goods, or products; offices; restaurants;
public lodging establishments as described in s. 509.242(1)(a);
food service vendors; sports arenas; theaters; tourist
attractions; and other for-profit business activities. A parcel
zoned to permit such uses by right without the requirement to
obtain a variance or waiver is considered commercial use for the
purposes of this section, irrespective of the local land
development regulation's listed category or title. The term does
not include home-based businesses or cottage food operations
undertaken on residential property, public lodging
establishments as described in s. 509.242(1)(c), or uses that
are accessory, ancillary, incidental to the allowable uses, or
allowed only on a temporary basis. Recreational uses, such as
golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools, and clubhouses,
within an area designated for residential use are not commercial
use, irrespective of how they are operated. [added: Farms and farm operations as those terms are defined in s. 823.14(3) and uses associated therewith, including the packaging and sale of products raised on the premises, are not commercial use.]
2. "Industrial use" means activities associated with the
manufacture, assembly, processing, or storage of products or the
performance of services related thereto. The term includes, but
is not limited to, such uses or activities as automobile
manufacturing or repair, boat manufacturing or repair, junk
yards, [deleted: meat packing facilities, citrus processing and packing facilities, produce processing and packing facilities,]
electrical generating plants, water treatment plants, sewage
treatment plants, and solid waste disposal sites. A parcel zoned
to permit such uses by right without the requirement to obtain a
variance or waiver is considered industrial use for the purposes
of this section, irrespective of the local land development
regulation's listed category or title. The term does not include
uses that are accessory, ancillary, incidental to the allowable
uses, or allowed only on a temporary basis. Recreational uses,
such as golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools, and
clubhouses, within an area designated for residential use are
not industrial use, irrespective of how they are operated. [added: Farms and farm operations as those terms are defined in s. 823.14(3) and uses associated therewith, including the packaging and sale of products raised on the premises, are not industrial use.]
3. "Mixed use" means any use that combines multiple types
of approved land uses from at least two of the residential use,
commercial use, and industrial use categories. The term does not
include uses that are accessory, ancillary, incidental to the
allowable uses, or allowed only on a temporary basis.
Recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, swimming
pools, and clubhouses, within an area designated for residential
use are not mixed use, irrespective of how they are operated.
4. "Planned unit development" has the same meaning as
provided in s. 163.3202(5)(b).
(o) This subsection does not apply to:
1. Airport-impacted areas as provided in s. 333.03.
2. Property defined as recreational and commercial working
waterfront in s. 342.201(2)(b) in any area zoned as industrial.
3. The Wekiva Study Area, as described in s. 369.316.
4. The Everglades Protection Area, as defined in s.
373.4592(2).
[added: 5. Areas subject to land development regulations, as defined in s. 163.3164, which are in existence before July 1, 2026, and are intended to retain the open character of land, including, but not limited to, open space districts, open space recreation districts, open use estate districts, open use rural districts, and park and open space districts.]
[added: 6. Any area of critical state concern, as designated in ss. 380.055, 380.0551, 380.0552, 380.0553, and 380.0555.]
[added: 7. Any portion of a property encumbered by a recorded conservation easement, as defined in s. 704.06(1).]
Section 3. [added: The amendments made by this act to ss. 125.01055(7)(n) and 166.04151(7)(n), Florida Statutes, are intended to be remedial and clarifying in nature and apply retroactively to January 1, 2024.]
Section 4. [added: An applicant for a proposed development authorized under s. 125.01055(7), Florida Statutes, or s. 166.04151(7), Florida Statutes, who submitted an application, a written request, or a notice of intent to use such provisions to the county or municipality and which application, written request, or notice of intent has been received by the county or municipality, as applicable, before July 1, 2026, may notify the county or municipality by July 1, 2026, of its intent to proceed under the provisions of s. 125.01055(7), Florida Statutes, or s. 166.04151(7), Florida Statutes, as they existed at the time of submittal. A county or municipality, as applicable, shall allow an applicant who submitted such an application, written request, or notice of intent before July 1, 2026, the opportunity to submit a revised application, written request, or notice of intent to account for the changes made by this act.]
Section 5. Paragraphs (a) and (o) of subsection (3) of
section 196.1978, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
196.1978 Affordable housing property exemption.—
(3)(a) As used in this subsection, the term:
1. "Corporation" means the Florida Housing Finance
Corporation.
[added: 2. "Multifamily project" shall include a development authorized under this subsection that is held under common ownership or control, approved and developed in compliance with the same site plan approval or development agreement or order, but shall exclude individual detached single-family residences, as well as parcels separated by more than 200 feet of land.]
[added: 3.][deleted: 2.] "Newly constructed" means an improvement to real
property which was substantially completed within 5 years before
the date of an applicant's first submission of a request for a
certification notice pursuant to this subsection.
[added: 4.][deleted: 3.] "Substantially completed" has the same meaning as in
s. 192.042(1).
(o)1. Beginning with the 2025 tax roll, a taxing authority
may elect, upon adoption of an ordinance or resolution approved
by a two-thirds vote of the governing body, not to exempt
property under sub-subparagraph (d)1.a. located in a county
specified pursuant to subparagraph 2., subject to the conditions
of this paragraph.
2. A taxing authority must make a finding in the ordinance
or resolution that [added: annual housing reports] [deleted: the most recently]
published [added: by the] Shimberg Center for Housing Studies [deleted: Annual Report, prepared] pursuant to s. 420.6075, [added: identify] [deleted: identifies]
that a county that is part of the jurisdiction of the taxing
authority is within a metropolitan statistical area or region
where, [added: for each of the previous 3 years,] the number of
affordable and available units in the metropolitan statistical
area or region is greater than the number of renter households
in the metropolitan statistical area or region for the category
entitled "0-120 percent AMI."
3. An election made pursuant to this paragraph may apply
only to the ad valorem property tax levies imposed within a
county specified pursuant to subparagraph 2. by the taxing
authority making the election.
4. The ordinance or resolution must take effect on the
January 1 immediately succeeding adoption and shall expire on
the second January 1 after the January 1 in which the ordinance
or resolution takes effect. The ordinance or resolution may be
renewed prior to its expiration pursuant to this paragraph.
5. The taxing authority proposing to make an election
under this paragraph must advertise the ordinance or resolution
or renewal thereof pursuant to the requirements of s. 50.011(1)
prior to adoption.
6. The taxing authority must provide to the property
appraiser the adopted ordinance or resolution or renewal thereof
by the effective date of the ordinance or resolution or renewal
thereof.
7. Notwithstanding an ordinance or resolution or renewal
thereof adopted pursuant to this paragraph, property in a
multifamily project that received an exemption pursuant to sub-
subparagraph (d)1.a. before the adoption or renewal of such
ordinance or resolution may continue to receive such exemption
for each subsequent consecutive year that the same owner or each
successive owner applies for and is granted the exemption.
[added: 8. Notwithstanding an ordinance or a resolution or a renewal thereof adopted pursuant to this paragraph, the owner of a property in a multifamily project that was issued a building permit on or after July 1, 2026, for the development of the multifamily project within 4 years before the effective date of such ordinance or resolution may apply for and be granted the exemption under sub-subparagraph (d)1.a. after meeting the requirements of this subsection and may continue to receive such exemption for each subsequent consecutive year that the same owner or each successive owner applies for and is granted the exemption.]
Section 6. [added: The amendments made by this act to s. 196.1978, Florida Statutes, first apply to the 2027 property tax roll.]
Section 7. Subsection (5) of section 333.03, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
333.03 Requirement to adopt airport zoning regulations.—
(5) Sections 125.01055(7) and 166.04151(7) do not apply to
any of the following, [added: unless the respective application is approved by the governing body of the airport:]
(a) A proposed development near a runway within one-
quarter of a mile laterally from the runway edge and within an
area that is the width of one-quarter of a mile extending at
right angles from the end of the runway for a distance of 10,000
feet of any existing airport runway or planned airport runway
identified in the local government's airport master plan.
(b) A proposed development within any airport noise zone
identified in the federal land use compatibility table or in a
land-use zoning or airport noise regulation adopted by the local
government.
(c) A proposed development that exceeds maximum height
restrictions identified in the political subdivision's airport
zoning regulation adopted pursuant to this section.
Section 8. Subsection (8) of section 760.22, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
760.22 Definitions.—As used in ss. 760.20-760.37, the
term:
(8) "Person" includes one or more individuals,
corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations,
legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies,
trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers, [deleted: and] fiduciaries, [added: agencies, governmental entities, and other legal or commercial entities.]
Section 9. Section 760.26, Florida Statutes, is amended to
read:
760.26 Prohibited discrimination in land use decisions and
in permitting of development.—It is unlawful to discriminate in
land use decisions or in the permitting of development based on
race, color, national origin, sex, disability, familial status,
[added: or] religion, or, except as otherwise provided by law, [added: based on]
the source of financing of a development or proposed
development, [added: including, but not limited to, financing of a development or on a proposed development for housing that is affordable as defined in s. 420.0004.]
Section 10. Subsection (4) of section 760.35, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
760.35 Civil actions and relief; administrative
procedures.—
(4) If the court finds that a [added: person has engaged in a]
discriminatory housing practice [deleted: has occurred,] it [added: must] [deleted: shall]
issue an order prohibiting the practice and providing
affirmative relief from the effects of the practice, including
injunctive and other equitable relief, actual and punitive
damages, and reasonable attorney fees and costs. [added: In accordance with s. 13, Art. X of the State Constitution, the state, for itself and its agencies or political subdivisions, waives sovereign immunity for a cause of action based upon the application of this section. Such waiver is limited only to actions brought under this section.]
Section 11. Subsection (1) of section 420.615, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
420.615 Affordable housing land donation density bonus
incentives.—
(1) A local government may provide density bonus
incentives pursuant to [deleted: the provisions of] this section to any
landowner who voluntarily donates fee simple interest in real
property to the local government for the purpose of assisting
the local government in providing affordable housing, [added: including housing that is affordable for military families receiving the basic allowance for housing.] Donated real property must be
determined by the local government to be appropriate for use as
affordable housing and must be subject to deed restrictions to
ensure that the property will be used for affordable housing.
Section 12. [added: The Office of Program Policy Analysis and Government Accountability (OPPAGA) shall evaluate the efficacy of using mezzanine finance, or second-position short-term debt, to stimulate the construction of owner-occupied housing that is affordable as defined in s. 420.0004(3), Florida Statutes, in this state. OPPAGA shall also evaluate the potential of tiny homes in meeting the need for affordable housing in this state. OPPAGA shall consult with the Florida Housing Finance Corporation and the Shimberg Center for Housing Studies at the University of Florida in conducting its evaluation. By December 31, 2027, OPPAGA shall submit a report of its findings to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives. Such report must include recommendations for the structuring of a model mezzanine finance program.]
Section 13. This act shall take effect July 1, 2026.
